In carrying out the commission to preach the good news of God's kingdom, Jehovah's Witnesses
have published hundreds of books and distributed millions of copies throughout the world.
Of these, one particular book stands above all the rest.
This book has a long history and was the triumph of years of research.
The book we are talking about is the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures.
It is a record of the sacred writings of God and held by some to be among the best translations
of the Bible ever produced.
But how did it come to be?
And what makes it important for those interested in the truth about God?
By the mid-19th century, Bible translations into English were readily available.
Charles Tase Russell used a variety of Bibles in his research.
He shared his suggestions with the readers of the magazine Zion's Watchtower.
Writing in 1880, Russell recommended to other Bible students the emphatic Diaglot and
versions done by Tishendorf and the American Bible Union.
By 1884, Russell, along with others interested in promoting Bible education, legally registered
the Zion's Watchtower Tract Society.
Zion's Watchtower grew to become a Bible distributor as a service to its readers.
The society drew attention to informative Bible translations.
In fact, they bought large quantities so as to get good rates and then made them available
at greatly reduced cost.
A Bible student could purchase editions such as The King James Bible and the so-called
Teacher's Bibles.
These were The King James translation along with a concordance, maps, and marginal references.
The emphatic Diaglot, it featured a Greek to English interlinear rendering.
Leicester's translation, it placed English text alongside the Hebrew.
Also the Newberry Bible, which had marginal references that drew attention to the occurrences
of the divine name Jehovah in the original language.
Tishendorf's New Testament, it had footnote references that clarified the variations in
ancient Greek Bible manuscripts.
Zion's Watchtower Society arranged for a special printing of the New Testament by Joseph
Rothram.
This was the first time a Bible was published bearing the society name.
In 1896, the corporation legally changed its name to the Watchtower Bible and Track Society.
This organization did not print and bind Bibles at that time.
Instead, it arranged with commercial firms to do that work.
However, it can be said that the organization was an active publisher of Bible translations.
In time, the organization would take the production of Bible translations into its own hands.
In December 1926, the Watchtower printed and bound the emphatic Diaglot in its concord
street factory.
It would be in 1942 when a complete Bible, the King James with marginal references, was
produced.
As useful as these various publications were, the organization was determined to convey
God's word in the best manner possible.
At Yankee Stadium, on Wednesday, August 2, 1950, then President of the Watchtower Bible
and Track Society, Nathan Nor revealed to the 82,075 in attendance that something new had
been obtained.
The accumulation of years of modern Bible scholarship was bearing fruit.
But now, it has the extreme pleasure of relating to the international, the opposite,
the increase in the assembly of the Jewish citizens, the no-world translation of the
Christians.
The scholarship for the New World Translation would continue with the gradual publication
of the Hebrew Scriptures.
The Bible would be released in sections over the span of the next 11 years, culminating
in a single volume produced in 1961.
The cost to obtain this complete New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, one dollar.
At last, a translation that sincere Bible students could be confident in.
In the past, many of the brothers and sisters have had to use the Bible that Christenham
has translated.
And because of Christenham's belief in the Trinity, Hell, Fire and other things, the
brothers continually, when they're reading the text, I have to ask themselves the question,
does it really say this in the original language?
But now that they have a Bible, whether it's in English or another language, that has
been prepared by Jehovah's organization, by those who understand the Scriptures, that
breeds confidence.
And the brothers, when they read the Bible, they don't have to be thinking about, does
it really say this, but they can start to think about, what does this mean for me?
The original New World Translation Committee left behind an amazing legacy of Bible scholarship.
These are some of the documents produced by the Committee over a 12-year period.
This is essentially the entire Bible produced painstakingly by manual typewriter and hand.
When you open these binders, you gain insight on a tremendous work done decades ago.
For example, on the first page of Genesis, the handwritten note of when the translation
work began on this portion of Scripture, 11.30 a.m. Tuesday, February 12, 1952.
Genesis 2.4, the first occurrence of God's name, Jehovah, in the Bible.
Handwritten marginal references of Romans chapter 1, handwritten edits that would ultimately
be used in the final production.
Genesis 1.4, after that, God saw that the light was good.
Genesis 2.5, now there was as yet no shrub of the field found in the earth.
And so the work would go through 66 books of the Bible.
They did this work without computers, without all the electronic reference items that we have these days.
And yet when we look at how they consistently tried to translate God's Word in a manner
that would be clear and understandable and yet still faithful to the original,
personally, it amazes me how they were able to accomplish it.
But on the other hand, I shouldn't be amazed because I know it was Jehovah's spirit
that was with those brothers that helped them in that regard.
All this work was accomplished by a committee of Bible scholars who wish to remain anonymous.
Their desire was that this Bible should bring attention to God and not to them.
Without question, the translation's greatest accomplishment
is the conscientious effort to render God's name, Jehovah,
in all the places it would have been featured in the original writings.
The New World translation was not the first to present God's name,
but it perhaps became the first to be consistent with its renderings in both the Hebrew
and Greek portions of the Bible.
The Greek scripture rendering of Jehovah has brought criticism from some.
The critics claim that Jesus' followers would have observed the Jewish superstition
that forbids the speaking of God's name.
It should be noted that other translations of the Bible also render the name Jehovah
in the Greek scriptures. The reason for doing so is very logical.
We see that Jehovah's name clearly is in the Hebrew text.
So quotations are made from the Hebrew Bible.
They should be there in the Greek text as well.
So by Jehovah's people being honest in trying to do what they see needs to be done,
no matter what the world may offer as an opinion, that builds confidence as well in the
translation. When we see how the New World translation really holds Jehovah's name up on high,
that warms our hearts and helps us to get to know Jehovah's as a person and as a friend.
The New World translation did not go unnoticed by those interested in Bible scholarship.
This work reflects an honest endeavor to achieve an understanding of the text that is as
accurate as possible. I have never discovered in the New World translation any biased intent to
read something into the text that it does not contain. The most scholarly Bible ever produced
is the New World Translation Reference Edition of 1984, containing the most advanced study aids.
Evidence of the depth of research available is the fact that at some of the organization's
Bible schools, students will spend five to two hour sessions learning its marginal references,
footnotes, and appendices. The results are more than just an academic appreciation of the translation.
The attention to detail touches hearts. When the class finishes, usually the reaction of the
students is they're totally amized and that is a joyous occasion when we see the practical benefit
that it's not an academic feature is not just something to look at for the sake of studying,
but something that will help them every day of their lives so that they can search the scriptures
more thoroughly. This afternoon we release the New World Translation, the complete Bible,
both in the Slovak and in the Czech languages. Since 1961, the New World Translation has been
released in over 120 languages with a printing of over 200 million. The means by which it is offered
includes printed books, sound recordings, internet pages, and by means of video,
sign languages for the deaf. While it certainly stands as an achievement of great scholarship,
more than that. The New World Translation has been instrumental in bringing millions of
honest-hearted persons to an accurate knowledge of the truth. All thanks and praise go to the
author of the Bible, our God, Jehovah.